I know the answer to this too because I heard you say it, but anyhow, I know the listeners
are going to want to know this.
At the end of White Gold Wielder, it seems like Covenant's dead.
Can you bring him back?
Well, you know, I always want to say gone but not forgotten.
One of the things that happens in the course of White Gold Wielder is that I work very
hard to establish the idea of people who come back from the dead.
Now in the first trilogy, there's a really crucial point which involves the breaking
of the law of death.
And this is one step along the path.
What this means is that somebody in our life with enough power can essentially bring up
ghosts to serve them.
Or can ghosts can affect or communicate with or be present to the living now because the
law of death has been broken.
But that's not, of course, the same thing as they're being fully present or as they're
being as effective as the living or of their being to impose their wills or of their being
physically corporeal.
I mean, there's all kinds of degrees to these things.
What happens, among other things, Ian White Gold Wielder is that another barrier gets
broken down.
Hyle, Troy, Ian and Laint brings Holly and back from the dead.
Now there are various requirements which have to be present.
There is an intact physical body, you know, Sundar kept her body with him so they have,
you know, a body in which she can be reincorporated.
And the dead spirit is then refused into the body.
And this is crucial because it makes possible Covenant's victory at the end.
I mean, Covenant defeats Lord Fowle after he's been killed.
Well, you know, this character isn't going to disappear at this point.
He is strong enough to beat Lord Fowle after he's dead.
You know, he's not gone.
And besides, after the whole thing's over, he's the one who's having a conversation
with Linden and explain.
Now, this is a subtle point, but it's important.
At the end of the power that preserves, Covenant has a kind of a little conversation with
the creator during the transition back to the real world.
Now, it's when Linden goes back to the real world, it's Covenant that she's having a
little conversation with.
This is not a trivial development.
It has, you know, it has a lot of implications for what may happen in the future in these
stories in terms of the adjustment of roles, which is taking place.
But I also did it to remind people again and again that Covenant's body has been
killed and in terms of the real world, he is dead.
But in terms of the land, you know, that spirit lives.
His friends were alive when he got to the land.
And if there's a future in which Linden Avery goes back to the land, there's no reason why
Covenant isn't going to be there.
And so the door is open for me to do what I may want to do in the future if I ever decide to do it.
What about this debris statement on the, I don't know, I guess the success of your books?
I can't think of maybe except with the possible exception of Tolkien, any other fantasy books
that have been successful with yours.
Well, I think that's true that, except for Tolkien, there hasn't been another one.
Now, you have to keep these things in perspective.
By and large, I sell probably 10 times as much as the average fantasy book.
And by and large, Tolkien sells about 10 times as much as I do.
You know, so there's still Tolkien and capital letters, and then there's me and fine print.
But it is true that these books have been more popular than most other fantasy that comes out
these days. And it's difficult to explain that in a lot of ways, because there are an awful
lot of good writers out there writing nowadays who are doing fantasy.
I always talk about Patricia McKillop, and she's done a trilogy, the Herittle Master series.
She's an astonishing writer, does wonderful work, and I will never be able to explain to you
why my books are so much more popular than hers.
But there are certain kinds of things that I think are clear.
And one of them is that I provide the epic fantasy experience that nobody else
since Tolkien does. I mean, no matter what my peers are doing in fantasy,
they are not doing it on this scale. And the scale puts a lot of pressure on in order to
write a convincing 500,000 word novel in which people don't get bored and in which you don't
lose track of what's happening and in which the writer doesn't drop stitches and forget characters
and in which it all fits together in the end. You know, not everybody can do that.
You can do the same thing on a short story scale. You can do the same thing on a regular
novel scale when you try to stretch that to 500,000 words. For a lot of people, the fact that
you're stretching, it shows. It just doesn't become, it doesn't seem natural. It doesn't,
for a lot of other writers. I think my particular talent as a writer is that when you give me a
canvas that big, I know exactly what to do with it. It has me to write a normal size novel and I
really have to struggle because I have, there isn't enough room and so things get twisted out of shape
when I try to make them fit on the picture and I can have lots of trouble trying to get a short
story or a novel into focus. But you give me that much room and I know what to do. So that means
that from a reader's point of view, a reader who wants to dive into something 500,000 words long,
and sort of revel in it for that kind of long reading experience that you don't get from a
normal novel, but you do get from Tolkien. Well, they can get that from me. It's going to be consistent
and coherent and logical and it's all going to fit together and it's going to come out in a way
that makes sense. And you can trust that from page one in my books. And that kind of epic reading
experience, I think, is something that a lot of people yearn for. It comes rarely in life and
that's one reason Lord of the Rings is so popular and that's one reason why my books are popular.
Excellent. Yeah, that's very good. I hadn't thought of that, but you're right. Okay, my third one,
last one. I teach a fantasy class at Odessa College. Whenever I can, I try to use quotes from
authors, you know, for the students benefit. And do you have any, one thing I keep trying to teach
them, tell them, convince them of the value of fantasy? Does it have a value? I mean, a student
will say, also, escape literature. Forget about it. It's not the real world. Fantasy is the most
fundamental form of literature in my mind. Historically, of course, it is the first form of
literature. You know, when you go back to what has existed for two or four thousand years, it's all
fantasy. In fact, we didn't have any other kind of literature until much more recent times.
And there are reasons for that. That's because it meets a particular
need and expresses a particular side of the human personality, which,
which in the old days, it was so obvious that that was what stories were for and what storytelling
was for that it never occurred to anybody to do anything else. Then somehow or another,
we invented, we invented realism and we invented, you know, storytelling, whereas the storytelling
becomes a reflection of the actual world instead of a reflection of envisioned worlds. And we've
gone so far down that road in Western literature in the past 500 years that we've reached a point
where we've forgotten that there used to be the literature used to do something else.
But I think what literature used to do is it is something that we've lost track of not because
we didn't need it, but because like everything else we got involved in what we were doing and we
drifted away. There's something, there is an aspect of being human that doesn't get expressed in
realistic prose. The fact is, if we're awake 18 hours a day, we spend 17 of those hours in a fantasy
world. Now, what I mean is very simple. Our imaginations, whether we're conscious of using
them or not, are the fundamental tool with which we cope with the real world. You're sitting here
listening to me talk and you're trying to decide what your next question is going to be. That's
fantasizing. You figure out, you know, I'm late people in another room will be doing this and so
for which I should have been there five minutes ago. That's fantasizing. When I get home, my wife's
going to yell at me, but I'm going to tell her off. That's fantasizing. You know, everything we do,
we prepare ourselves for situations, we figure out, we solve problems, we do everything by using
our imaginations by fantasizing. And of course, when we're asleep, we're ruled by fantasy. The
fantasy making impulse on a part of human beings is our fundamental survival trait. And it is
one of the key things that makes us human. And you try to find a literature that deals with that
in a realistic mainstream. That is an aspect of who we are that gets lost when you start writing a
literature that focuses on reflections of the real world. Now, I wouldn't, you know, I don't claim for
a second that those reflections aren't terribly valuable. And it's a good and strong thing that
we have realistic literature and whatnot. But it's not the whole story on literature. It's not
the whole story on human beings, either as human beings or as readers. When you start writing good
fantasy, what you're doing is you're trying to turn the focus of your fiction around from the world
back into the human mind. And you're trying to reach down into things buried in each of our
imaginations that we all have in common. You're trying, essentially, good fantasy deals with
the imagination itself. And if I had to, you know, come up with a one word definition of what magic
is in the Chronicles of Topsicopin, I would say that magic is imagination.
That's what good fantasy novels deal about from Lord of the Rings to my books to Patricia McKeil
to anything else. It deals with the side of being human that dreams and fantasizes and which
solves problems, among other things. The difference, of course, in a fantasy is that
probably the problems can be solved. Whereas in the real world, although you invent a solution,
it turns out not to fit the circumstances and the circumstances can sometimes overwhelm you,
anyways. But still, if you weren't inventing those kinds of solutions, if you weren't fantasizing
in your real world, you would be dead already. The human race would have died out, you know,
half a million years ago. Somebody fantasized using a club to bring down game. And so that little
branch of, you know, eight man didn't starve to death. Somebody fantasized taking this smoldering
kind of thing and, you know, putting a little more wood on it and building it into a fire and
driving back heat and doing something with food and whatnot. And the human race didn't starve to
what bloody physically ill equipped to cope with the world that animals cope with. We don't have
the strength, we don't have the smell, we don't have the claws, we don't have the hide, we don't
have them, you know, anything. How did puny little human beings become the dominant species on this
planet? Because we got an imagination. People fantasize possibilities and those turn out to
be what saved your life. That's the side of being human that fantasy novels are about. And
I don't think of it as escapism at all. I think of it as really looking at yourself in the mirror.
Excellent. Okay. Yeah, we're gonna have to let you go. That's very fine. I mean, we could talk
for hours on this, but that's fine. That's enough. That's probably two weeks more for shows. Listen,
I would like to send these tapes to you. Can you give me an address or give me some care to the publisher?